README.md, before:

[![Built With Ratatui](https://ratatui.rs/built-with-ratatui/badge.svg)](https://ratatui.rs/)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/workflows/Rust/badge.svg)](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/actions)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/rustnet-monitor.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/rustnet-monitor)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache--2.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/domcyrus/rustnet.svg)](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/releases)
[![Docker Image](https://img.shields.io/badge/docker-ghcr.io-blue?logo=docker)](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/pkgs/container/rustnet)

# RustNet

A cross-platform network monitoring tool built with Rust. RustNet provides real-time visibility into network connections with detailed state information, connection lifecycle management, deep packet inspection, and a terminal user interface.

![RustNet Demo](./assets/rustnet.gif)

## Features

- **Real-time Network Monitoring**: Monitor active TCP, UDP, ICMP, and ARP connections with detailed state information
- **Connection States**: Track TCP states (`ESTABLISHED`, `SYN_SENT`, `TIME_WAIT`), QUIC states (`QUIC_INITIAL`, `QUIC_HANDSHAKE`, `QUIC_CONNECTED`), DNS states, SSH states, and activity-based UDP states
- **Deep Packet Inspection (DPI)**: Detect application protocols including HTTP, HTTPS/TLS with SNI, DNS, SSH with version detection, and QUIC with CONNECTION_CLOSE frame detection
- **Smart Connection Lifecycle**: Protocol-aware timeouts with visual staleness indicators (white → yellow → red) before cleanup
- **Process Identification**: Associate network connections with running processes
- **Service Name Resolution**: Identify well-known services using port numbers
- **Cross-platform Support**: Works on Linux, macOS, Windows and potentially BSD systems
- **Advanced Filtering**: Real-time vim/fzf-style filtering with keyword support (`port:`, `src:`, `dst:`, `sni:`, `process:`, `state:`)
- **Terminal User Interface**: Beautiful TUI built with ratatui with adjustable column widths
- **Multi-threaded Processing**: Concurrent packet processing for high performance
- **Optional Logging**: Detailed logging with configurable log levels (disabled by default)

<details>
<summary><b>eBPF Enhanced Process Identification (Experimental - Linux)</b></summary>

When built with the `ebpf` feature on Linux, RustNet uses kernel eBPF programs for enhanced performance and lower overhead process identification. However, this comes with important limitations:

**Process Name Limitations:**
- eBPF uses the kernel's `comm` field, which is limited to 16 characters
- Shows the task/thread command name, not the full executable path
- Multi-threaded applications often show thread names instead of the main process name

**Real-world Examples:**
- **Firefox**: May appear as "Socket Thread", "Web Content", "Isolated Web Co", or "MainThread"
- **Chrome**: May appear as "ThreadPoolForeg", "Chrome_IOThread", "BrokerProcess", or "SandboxHelper"
- **Electron apps**: Often show as "electron", "node", or internal thread names
- **System processes**: Show truncated names like "systemd-resolve" → "systemd-resolve"

**Fallback Behavior:**
- When eBPF fails to load or lacks sufficient permissions, RustNet automatically falls back to standard procfs-based process identification
- Standard mode provides full process names but with higher CPU overhead

See [EBPF_BUILD.md](EBPF_BUILD.md) for build instructions and [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) for technical details.

</details>

## Quick Start

### Installation

**From crates.io (Recommended):**
```bash
cargo install rustnet-monitor
```

**From release packages:**
- Download pre-built packages for macOS, Windows, or Linux from [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/releases)
- See [INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md) for detailed installation instructions for all platforms

**From source:**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet.git
cd rustnet
cargo build --release
```

**Via Docker:**
```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/domcyrus/rustnet:latest
docker run --rm -it --cap-add=NET_RAW --cap-add=NET_ADMIN --net=host \
  ghcr.io/domcyrus/rustnet:latest
```

### Running RustNet

Packet capture requires elevated privileges. See [INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md) for detailed permission setup.

```bash
# Quick start with sudo
sudo rustnet

# Or grant capabilities to run without sudo (Linux)
sudo setcap cap_net_raw,cap_net_admin=eip /path/to/rustnet
rustnet
```

**Common options:**
```bash
rustnet -i eth0              # Specify network interface
rustnet --show-localhost     # Show localhost connections
rustnet -r 500               # Set refresh interval (ms)
rustnet --no-dpi             # Disable deep packet inspection
rustnet -l debug             # Enable debug logging
```

See [USAGE.md](USAGE.md) for complete command-line options and detailed usage guide.

## Keyboard Controls

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `q` | Quit (press twice to confirm) |
| `Ctrl+C` | Quit immediately |
| `Tab` | Switch between tabs |
| `↑/k` `↓/j` | Navigate up/down |
| `g` `G` | Jump to first/last connection |
| `Enter` | View connection details |
| `Esc` | Go back or clear filter |
| `c` | Copy remote address |
| `p` | Toggle service names/ports |
| `s` `S` | Cycle sort columns / toggle direction |
| `/` | Enter filter mode |
| `h` | Toggle help |

See [USAGE.md](USAGE.md) for detailed keyboard controls and navigation tips.

## Filtering & Sorting

**Quick filtering examples:**
```
/google                        # Search for "google" anywhere
/port:443                      # Filter by port
/process:firefox               # Filter by process
/state:established             # Filter by connection state
/dport:443 sni:github.com      # Combine filters
```

**Sorting:**
- Press `s` to cycle through sortable columns (Protocol, Address, State, Service, Bandwidth, Process)
- Press `S` (Shift+s) to toggle sort direction
- Find bandwidth hogs: Press `s` until "Down↓/Up" appears

See [USAGE.md](USAGE.md) for complete filtering syntax and sorting guide.

<details>
<summary><b>Advanced Filtering Examples</b></summary>

**Keyword filters:**
- `port:44` - Ports containing "44" (443, 8080, 4433)
- `sport:80` - Source ports containing "80"
- `dport:443` - Destination ports containing "443"
- `src:192.168` - Source IPs containing "192.168"
- `dst:github.com` - Destinations containing "github.com"
- `process:ssh` - Process names containing "ssh"
- `sni:api` - SNI hostnames containing "api"
- `ssh:openssh` - SSH connections using OpenSSH
- `state:established` - Filter by protocol state
- `proto:tcp` - Filter by protocol type

**State filtering:**
- `state:syn_recv` - Half-open connections (SYN flood detection)
- `state:established` - Established connections only
- `state:quic_connected` - Active QUIC connections
- `state:dns_query` - DNS query connections

**Combined examples:**
- `sport:80 process:nginx` - Nginx connections from port 80
- `dport:443 sni:google.com` - HTTPS to Google
- `process:firefox state:quic_connected` - Firefox QUIC connections
- `dport:22 ssh:openssh state:established` - Established OpenSSH connections

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Connection Lifecycle & Visual Indicators</b></summary>

RustNet uses smart timeouts and visual warnings before removing connections:

**Visual staleness indicators:**
- **White**: Active (< 75% of timeout)
- **Yellow**: Stale (75-90% of timeout)
- **Red**: Critical (> 90% of timeout)

**Protocol-aware timeouts:**
- **HTTP/HTTPS**: 10 minutes (supports keep-alive)
- **SSH**: 30 minutes (long sessions)
- **TCP active**: 10 minutes, idle: 5 minutes
- **QUIC active**: 10 minutes, idle: 5 minutes
- **DNS**: 30 seconds
- **TCP CLOSED**: 5 seconds

Example: An HTTP connection turns yellow at 7.5 min, red at 9 min, and is removed at 10 min.

See [USAGE.md](USAGE.md) for complete timeout details.

</details>

## Documentation

- **[INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md)** - Detailed installation instructions for all platforms, permission setup, and troubleshooting
- **[USAGE.md](USAGE.md)** - Complete usage guide including command-line options, filtering, sorting, and logging
- **[ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md)** - Technical architecture, platform implementations, and performance details
- **[ROADMAP.md](ROADMAP.md)** - Planned features and future improvements
- **[RELEASE.md](RELEASE.md)** - Release process for maintainers
- **[EBPF_BUILD.md](EBPF_BUILD.md)** - eBPF build instructions and requirements

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- Built with [ratatui](https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui) for the terminal UI
- Packet capture powered by [libpcap](https://www.tcpdump.org/)
- Inspired by tools like `tshark/wireshark/tcpdump`, `sniffnet`, `netstat`, `ss`, and `iftop`
- Some code is vibe coded (OMG) / may the LLM gods be with you

---

## Documentation Moved

Some sections have been moved to dedicated files for better organization:

- **Permissions Setup**: Now in [INSTALL.md - Permissions Setup](INSTALL.md#permissions-setup)
- **Installation Instructions**: Now in [INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md)
- **Detailed Usage**: Now in [USAGE.md](USAGE.md)
- **Architecture Details**: Now in [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md)

Commit message:

fix: eliminate excessive procfs scanning causing high CPU usage
The procfs-based process lookup was triggering a full scan on every cache
miss instead of relying on periodic refresh. This caused 50+ full procfs
scans per enrichment cycle when multiple connections lacked process info.

Changed get_process_for_connection() to do simple cache lookups only.
Periodic refresh (every 5s) is already handled by the enrichment thread.

Also added PROFILING.md with flamegraph profiling guide.

README.md, after:

[![Built With Ratatui](https://ratatui.rs/built-with-ratatui/badge.svg)](https://ratatui.rs/)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/workflows/Rust/badge.svg)](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/actions)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/rustnet-monitor.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/rustnet-monitor)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache--2.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/domcyrus/rustnet.svg)](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/releases)
[![Docker Image](https://img.shields.io/badge/docker-ghcr.io-blue?logo=docker)](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/pkgs/container/rustnet)

# RustNet

A cross-platform network monitoring tool built with Rust. RustNet provides real-time visibility into network connections with detailed state information, connection lifecycle management, deep packet inspection, and a terminal user interface.

![RustNet Demo](./assets/rustnet.gif)

## Features

- **Real-time Network Monitoring**: Monitor active TCP, UDP, ICMP, and ARP connections with detailed state information
- **Connection States**: Track TCP states (`ESTABLISHED`, `SYN_SENT`, `TIME_WAIT`), QUIC states (`QUIC_INITIAL`, `QUIC_HANDSHAKE`, `QUIC_CONNECTED`), DNS states, SSH states, and activity-based UDP states
- **Deep Packet Inspection (DPI)**: Detect application protocols including HTTP, HTTPS/TLS with SNI, DNS, SSH with version detection, and QUIC with CONNECTION_CLOSE frame detection
- **Smart Connection Lifecycle**: Protocol-aware timeouts with visual staleness indicators (white → yellow → red) before cleanup
- **Process Identification**: Associate network connections with running processes
- **Service Name Resolution**: Identify well-known services using port numbers
- **Cross-platform Support**: Works on Linux, macOS, Windows and potentially BSD systems
- **Advanced Filtering**: Real-time vim/fzf-style filtering with keyword support (`port:`, `src:`, `dst:`, `sni:`, `process:`, `state:`)
- **Terminal User Interface**: Beautiful TUI built with ratatui with adjustable column widths
- **Multi-threaded Processing**: Concurrent packet processing for high performance
- **Optional Logging**: Detailed logging with configurable log levels (disabled by default)

<details>
<summary><b>eBPF Enhanced Process Identification (Experimental - Linux)</b></summary>

When built with the `ebpf` feature on Linux, RustNet uses kernel eBPF programs for enhanced performance and lower overhead process identification. However, this comes with important limitations:

**Process Name Limitations:**
- eBPF uses the kernel's `comm` field, which is limited to 16 characters
- Shows the task/thread command name, not the full executable path
- Multi-threaded applications often show thread names instead of the main process name

**Real-world Examples:**
- **Firefox**: May appear as "Socket Thread", "Web Content", "Isolated Web Co", or "MainThread"
- **Chrome**: May appear as "ThreadPoolForeg", "Chrome_IOThread", "BrokerProcess", or "SandboxHelper"
- **Electron apps**: Often show as "electron", "node", or internal thread names
- **System processes**: Show truncated names like "systemd-resolve" → "systemd-resolve"

**Fallback Behavior:**
- When eBPF fails to load or lacks sufficient permissions, RustNet automatically falls back to standard procfs-based process identification
- Standard mode provides full process names but with higher CPU overhead

See [EBPF_BUILD.md](EBPF_BUILD.md) for build instructions and [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) for technical details.

</details>

## Quick Start

### Installation

**From crates.io (Recommended):**
```bash
cargo install rustnet-monitor
```

**From release packages:**
- Download pre-built packages for macOS, Windows, or Linux from [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet/releases)
- See [INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md) for detailed installation instructions for all platforms

**From source:**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/domcyrus/rustnet.git
cd rustnet
cargo build --release
```

**Via Docker:**
```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/domcyrus/rustnet:latest
docker run --rm -it --cap-add=NET_RAW --cap-add=NET_ADMIN --net=host \
  ghcr.io/domcyrus/rustnet:latest
```

### Running RustNet

Packet capture requires elevated privileges. See [INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md) for detailed permission setup.

```bash
# Quick start with sudo
sudo rustnet

# Or grant capabilities to run without sudo (Linux)
sudo setcap cap_net_raw,cap_net_admin=eip /path/to/rustnet
rustnet
```

**Common options:**
```bash
rustnet -i eth0              # Specify network interface
rustnet --show-localhost     # Show localhost connections
rustnet -r 500               # Set refresh interval (ms)
rustnet --no-dpi             # Disable deep packet inspection
rustnet -l debug             # Enable debug logging
```

See [USAGE.md](USAGE.md) for complete command-line options and detailed usage guide.

## Keyboard Controls

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `q` | Quit (press twice to confirm) |
| `Ctrl+C` | Quit immediately |
| `Tab` | Switch between tabs |
| `↑/k` `↓/j` | Navigate up/down |
| `g` `G` | Jump to first/last connection |
| `Enter` | View connection details |
| `Esc` | Go back or clear filter |
| `c` | Copy remote address |
| `p` | Toggle service names/ports |
| `s` `S` | Cycle sort columns / toggle direction |
| `/` | Enter filter mode |
| `h` | Toggle help |

See [USAGE.md](USAGE.md) for detailed keyboard controls and navigation tips.

## Filtering & Sorting

**Quick filtering examples:**
```
/google                        # Search for "google" anywhere
/port:443                      # Filter by port
/process:firefox               # Filter by process
/state:established             # Filter by connection state
/dport:443 sni:github.com      # Combine filters
```

**Sorting:**
- Press `s` to cycle through sortable columns (Protocol, Address, State, Service, Bandwidth, Process)
- Press `S` (Shift+s) to toggle sort direction
- Find bandwidth hogs: Press `s` until "Down↓/Up" appears

See [USAGE.md](USAGE.md) for complete filtering syntax and sorting guide.

<details>
<summary><b>Advanced Filtering Examples</b></summary>

**Keyword filters:**
- `port:44` - Ports containing "44" (443, 8080, 4433)
- `sport:80` - Source ports containing "80"
- `dport:443` - Destination ports containing "443"
- `src:192.168` - Source IPs containing "192.168"
- `dst:github.com` - Destinations containing "github.com"
- `process:ssh` - Process names containing "ssh"
- `sni:api` - SNI hostnames containing "api"
- `ssh:openssh` - SSH connections using OpenSSH
- `state:established` - Filter by protocol state
- `proto:tcp` - Filter by protocol type

**State filtering:**
- `state:syn_recv` - Half-open connections (SYN flood detection)
- `state:established` - Established connections only
- `state:quic_connected` - Active QUIC connections
- `state:dns_query` - DNS query connections

**Combined examples:**
- `sport:80 process:nginx` - Nginx connections from port 80
- `dport:443 sni:google.com` - HTTPS to Google
- `process:firefox state:quic_connected` - Firefox QUIC connections
- `dport:22 ssh:openssh state:established` - Established OpenSSH connections

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Connection Lifecycle & Visual Indicators</b></summary>

RustNet uses smart timeouts and visual warnings before removing connections:

**Visual staleness indicators:**
- **White**: Active (< 75% of timeout)
- **Yellow**: Stale (75-90% of timeout)
- **Red**: Critical (> 90% of timeout)

**Protocol-aware timeouts:**
- **HTTP/HTTPS**: 10 minutes (supports keep-alive)
- **SSH**: 30 minutes (long sessions)
- **TCP active**: 10 minutes, idle: 5 minutes
- **QUIC active**: 10 minutes, idle: 5 minutes
- **DNS**: 30 seconds
- **TCP CLOSED**: 5 seconds

Example: An HTTP connection turns yellow at 7.5 min, red at 9 min, and is removed at 10 min.

See [USAGE.md](USAGE.md) for complete timeout details.

</details>

## Documentation

- **[INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md)** - Detailed installation instructions for all platforms, permission setup, and troubleshooting
- **[USAGE.md](USAGE.md)** - Complete usage guide including command-line options, filtering, sorting, and logging
- **[ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md)** - Technical architecture, platform implementations, and performance details
- **[PROFILING.md](PROFILING.md)** - Performance profiling guide with flamegraph setup and optimization tips
- **[ROADMAP.md](ROADMAP.md)** - Planned features and future improvements
- **[RELEASE.md](RELEASE.md)** - Release process for maintainers
- **[EBPF_BUILD.md](EBPF_BUILD.md)** - eBPF build instructions and requirements

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- Built with [ratatui](https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui) for the terminal UI
- Packet capture powered by [libpcap](https://www.tcpdump.org/)
- Inspired by tools like `tshark/wireshark/tcpdump`, `sniffnet`, `netstat`, `ss`, and `iftop`
- Some code is vibe coded (OMG) / may the LLM gods be with you

---

## Documentation Moved

Some sections have been moved to dedicated files for better organization:

- **Permissions Setup**: Now in [INSTALL.md - Permissions Setup](INSTALL.md#permissions-setup)
- **Installation Instructions**: Now in [INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md)
- **Detailed Usage**: Now in [USAGE.md](USAGE.md)
- **Architecture Details**: Now in [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md)
