debian/README.md, before:

# Ubuntu PPA Packaging for RustNet

RustNet uses GitHub Actions to automatically build and upload packages to Ubuntu PPA.

## Quick Start

Push a git tag to trigger automatic PPA release:

```bash
git tag v0.15.0
git push origin v0.15.0
```

This automatically builds and uploads to both Ubuntu 22.04 (Jammy) and 24.04 (Noble).

## GitHub Secrets Setup

Add these secrets to your GitHub repository (Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions):

### 1. GPG_PRIVATE_KEY

Your passphrase-free CI GPG private key:

```bash
cat ci-signing-key.asc
# Copy the entire output including BEGIN/END markers
```

### 2. GPG_KEY_ID

Your CI GPG key ID:

```bash
gpg --list-keys cadetg@gmail.com
# Copy the key ID (long hex string)
```

## Installation (for users)

```bash
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:domcyrus/rustnet
sudo apt update
sudo apt install rustnet
```

## Package Details

- **Source**: rustnet-monitor
- **Binary**: rustnet
- **Maintainer**: Marco Cadetg <cadetg@gmail.com>
- **PPA**: https://launchpad.net/~domcyrus/+archive/ubuntu/rustnet
- **Supported**: Ubuntu 22.04 LTS, 24.04 LTS
- **Architectures**: amd64, arm64, armhf

## Workflow

See [.github/workflows/ppa-release.yml](../.github/workflows/ppa-release.yml)

## Links

- [PPA Packages](https://launchpad.net/~domcyrus/+archive/ubuntu/rustnet/+packages)
- [Build Logs](https://launchpad.net/~domcyrus/+archive/ubuntu/rustnet/+builds)

Commit message:

Add Ubuntu PPA packaging support (#47)
Adds Ubuntu PPA packaging with automated GitHub Actions workflow.

- Debian packaging files in debian/ directory
- GitHub Actions workflow for automated PPA uploads
- Targets Ubuntu Questing (25.10) with Rust 1.88

debian/README.md, after:

# Ubuntu PPA Packaging for RustNet

RustNet uses GitHub Actions to automatically build and upload packages to Ubuntu PPA.

## Quick Start

Push a git tag to trigger automatic PPA release:

```bash
git tag v0.15.0
git push origin v0.15.0
```

This automatically builds and uploads to Ubuntu 25.04 (Questing) which has Rust 1.85 for edition 2024 support.

## GitHub Secrets Setup

Add these secrets to your GitHub repository (Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions):

### 1. GPG_PRIVATE_KEY

Your passphrase-free CI GPG private key:

```bash
cat ci-signing-key.asc
# Copy the entire output including BEGIN/END markers
```

### 2. GPG_KEY_ID

Your CI GPG key ID:

```bash
gpg --list-keys cadetg@gmail.com
# Copy the key ID (long hex string)
```

## Installation (for users)

```bash
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:domcyrus/rustnet
sudo apt update
sudo apt install rustnet
```

## Package Details

- **Source**: rustnet-monitor
- **Binary**: rustnet
- **Maintainer**: Marco Cadetg <cadetg@gmail.com>
- **PPA**: https://launchpad.net/~domcyrus/+archive/ubuntu/rustnet
- **Supported**: Ubuntu 24.04 LTS (Noble) and later
- **Architectures**: amd64, arm64, armhf

## Workflow

See [.github/workflows/ppa-release.yml](../.github/workflows/ppa-release.yml)

## Links

- [PPA Packages](https://launchpad.net/~domcyrus/+archive/ubuntu/rustnet/+packages)
- [Build Logs](https://launchpad.net/~domcyrus/+archive/ubuntu/rustnet/+builds)
